Document requirements to use network areas (#12290)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/enterprise/federation.mdx

  {' '}for additional information.
</EnterpriseAlert>

Consul's _WAN gossip_ federation capability uses the same gossip mechanism that is used for a single datacenter.

> WAN gossip federation requires that every server from every datacenter

Author: Unfortunately, there's no central page (that I'm aware of) comparing the different federation models. That would be useful content to reference here...

I'll see if I can come up with a brief description (knowing that such a central page/content doesn't exist yet).

requests for remote resources (in spite of the partially-connected nature of the
topology as a whole). Consul datacenters can simultaneously participate in both
network areas and the existing WAN pool, which eases migration.

## Requirements

- Consul Enterprise 0.8+
- [Direct connectivity between all Consul servers](https://www.consul.io/docs/k8s/installation/multi-cluster#traditional-wan-federation)
  - Verify that [`connect.enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation`](/docs/agent/options#connect_enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation)
    is set to `false` (default) to ensure cross-datacenter control plane traffic is direct, not

>     [funneled through mesh gateways](https://www.consul.io/docs/connect/gateways/mesh-gateway/wan-federation-via-mesh-gateways)

Reviewer: If the bulleted-list format is too limiting for the nuance you want to describe, then I would do something like this:

## Requirements

The following conditions are required to enable WAN federated for Consul Enterprise deployments.

### Version

Consul Enterprise 0.8+ is required.

### Control Plan Requirements

Consul servers must have direct connections to each other (see <LINK>). Control plane traffic must have direct routes and cannot be funneled through mesh gateways. Verify that connect.enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation is set to false (default).

---
It might be confusing to link to a topic that we're telling users NOT to implement, i.e., the mesh gateway topic and the hub-and-spoke tutorial referenced earlier.

>     [funneled through mesh gateways](https://www.consul.io/docs/connect/gateways/mesh-gateway/wan-federation-via-mesh-gateways)

Author: > It might be confusing to link to a topic that we're telling users NOT to implement, i.e., the mesh gateway topic and the hub-and-spoke tutorial referenced earlier.

Is the suggestion that I remove the link but otherwise keep the text?

> If the bulleted-list format is too limiting for the nuance you want to describe

Is the suggestion that I use this alternate format instead of sub-bullets (if I feel a sub-bullet is needed)? I ask because the conversation on Slack on this topic suggested that this alternate format was too verbose for the content being conveyed, and that the short bulleted list was probably a better choice.

>     [funneled through mesh gateways](https://www.consul.io/docs/connect/gateways/mesh-gateway/wan-federation-via-mesh-gateways)

Reviewer: Yes, the consensus in Slack was to use bullets. The problem with having these discussions in that platform is that we lose a lot of the context that inform our decisions. So, yes, I think if you need the room to describe additional context, then I would go ahead an use the 'long-form' requirements. 

Also, yes, I think we should remove the link to information we're telling users not to implement.

>     [funneled through mesh gateways](https://www.consul.io/docs/connect/gateways/mesh-gateway/wan-federation-via-mesh-gateways)

Author: > Also, yes, I think we should remove the link to information we're telling users not to implement.

I think I included that link in case someone wanted to learn more about what that meant (or didn't even know it was an option in Consul). I wasn't expecting most users to click on this if it's not something they intend to implement, but I wanted them to be able to learn more about it easily if they wanted. Should I still remove that link?

>     [funneled through mesh gateways](https://www.consul.io/docs/connect/gateways/mesh-gateway/wan-federation-via-mesh-gateways)

Author: There isn't _a lot_ of additional context required. It's the same as on the other page: one of the bullets warrants a second sentence of elaboration (given in a sub-bullet).

I agree that we'd want the long-form version if there was a lot of context required. But in this case, I'm leaning towards leaving it as a concise, bulleted list:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/85913323/155226889-53758f60-cc62-46bb-82ea-fefc15802612.png)

requests for remote resources (in spite of the partially-connected nature of the
topology as a whole). Consul datacenters can simultaneously participate in both
network areas and the existing WAN pool, which eases migration.

## Requirements

- Consul Enterprise 0.8+

> - Direct connectivity between all Consul servers in the datacenters you wish to
>   pairwise federate with a network area
>   - To ensure connectivity is direct, not funneled through mesh gateways, verify that
>     [`connect.enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation`](/docs/agent/options#connect_enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation)
>     is set to `false` (default)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All Consul servers in the network you want to federate must be connected to each other directly. To ensure connectivity is direct, not funneled through mesh gateways, verify that the [`connect.enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation`](/docs/agent/options#connect_enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation) option is set to `false` (default).
```
Sorry, I had a hard time parsing that requirement. Is this what you mean?

> - Direct connectivity between all Consul servers in the datacenters you wish to
>   pairwise federate with a network area
>   - To ensure connectivity is direct, not funneled through mesh gateways, verify that
>     [`connect.enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation`](/docs/agent/options#connect_enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation)
>     is set to `false` (default)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All Consul servers in the network you want to federate must be connected to each other directly. To ensure connectivity is direct, not funneled through mesh gateways, verify that the [`connect.enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation`](/docs/agent/options#connect_enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation) option is set to `false` (default).
```
Sorry, I had a hard time parsing that requirement. Is this what you mean?

requests for remote resources (in spite of the partially-connected nature of the
topology as a whole). Consul datacenters can simultaneously participate in both
network areas and the existing WAN pool, which eases migration.

## Requirements

> - Consul Enterprise 0.8+
> - **Direct server connectivity:**
>   All Consul servers in the 2 Consul datacenters
>   you want to connect with a network area must have direct network connection. 
>   To ensure connectivity is direct, not funneled through mesh gateways,
>   verify that the
>   [`connect.enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#connect_enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation)
>   option is set to `false` (default).
> - **Primary datacenter connectivity:**
>   All Consul datacenters must be connected
>   to the [primary_datacenter](/docs/agent/config/config-files#primary_datacenter)
>   through WAN gossip or a network area.
>   Network areas cannot be if two datacenters are connected only through a
>   [cluster peering](/docs/connect/cluster-peering) relationship.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Consul Enterprise 0.8+
- **Direct server connectivity between all Consul servers in each datacenter:**
  Consul servers in each datacenter you want to connect in the network area must have a direct network connection. 
  To ensure connectivity is direct and not funneled through mesh gateways,
  verify that the
  [`connect.enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation`](/docs/agent/config/config-files#connect_enable_mesh_gateway_wan_federation)
  option is set to `false` (default).
- **Primary datacenter connectivity:**
  All Consul datacenters must be connected to the [primary_datacenter](/docs/agent/config/config-files#primary_datacenter)
  through WAN gossip or a network area. You cannot connect network areas if datacenters peered (refer to [Cluster Peering](/docs/connect/cluster-peering) for documentation on peering clusters).
```
Are you limited to federating two datacenters? Could you have more than one secondary DC?

Author: A single network area is always a relationship between 2 datacenters.

You can have as many secondary datacenters as you want with WAN federation. But a network area within a WAN federation connects a pair of datacenters (primary <-> secondary, or secondary <-> secondary).

Any thoughts on how to make this clearer in the text?
